# Building ETL Pipeling For Sparkify using Amazon S3 and Amazon Redshift

## Problem Statement

Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project.  We have to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 



## Datasets (Song Data and Log Data)

# Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

    song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

Single row in the file has the following data structure.

    {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

# Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

# Data Modelling
For Sparkify, after analysing the datasets and the problem statement we can come to the conclusion that there is 1 fact and 4 dimensions table:
FACT table: songplays
Dimensions Table: users, songs, artists and time tables.
Hence we can use the STAR schema to model the data.
1. There are no complex child to parent relationships, which rules out the possibilty for Snowflake schema
2. Relational Modeling will be required as there is relationships maintained between the table.

# Schema For Song Analysis
Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

# Fact Table
1. songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
                songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
#Dimension Tables
1. users - users in the app (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)
2. songs - songs in music database (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)
3. artists - artists in music database(artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude)
4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units(start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)

We also be creating two additional staging (temporary ) tables as staging_events and staging_songs.


# Data Modeling and ETL Steps:
Below are steps you can follow to complete each component of this project.

Create Table Schemas
1. Design schemas for the fact and dimension tables
2. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3. (Execute command: python3 create_cluster.py)
3. Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
4. Write SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
5. Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables (Excute Command: create_tables.py)
6. Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.

Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
1. Build ETL Pipeline 
2. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
3. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
4. Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py  (Excute Command: python3 etl.py)
5. Delete your redshift cluster when finished. (Excute Command: python3 terminate_redshift_cluster.py)



