# Building ETL Pipeling For Sparkify using Amazon S3 and Amazon Redshift

## Problem Statement

Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engin to build an ETL pipeline for a data lake hosted on S3. Will need to load data from S3, process the data into analytics tables using Spark, and load them back into S3. 


## Datasets (Song Data and Log Data)

# Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

    song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

Single row in the file has the following data structure.

    {"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

# Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
    log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

# Data Lake
We will use Apache Spark to read json files and process the data to store them in the dimensions we require. We will make use of Schema-on-read and transform them to use it for analytics.


# Fact Table
1. songplays - records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
                songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
#Dimension Tables
1. users - users in the app (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)
2. songs - songs in music database (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)
3. artists - artists in music database(artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude)
4. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units(start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)

We also be creating two additional staging (temporary ) tables as staging_events and staging_songs.


# Data Modeling and ETL Steps:
Below are steps you can follow to complete each component of this project.
Store your credentials in the dl.cfg file to use the AWS to process the cluster
Test by running -> python3 etl.py